--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	 		DUNGEON CRAWL: LIST OF KEYS AND COMMANDS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Main screen
-----------
Crawl has many commands to be issued by single key strokes. This can become
confusing, since there are also several modes; here is the full list. Some 
commands are particularly useful in combination with certain interface options;
such options are mentioned in the list. For a description of them, please look
into crawl_options.txt.

Saving games:
	S		Save game with query and exit.
	Ctrl-X		Save game without query and exit.
	Q		Quit without saving.

Movement:
	direction	Moves one square, direction is either one of the 
			numpad cursor keys (try both Numlock on and off) or 
			one of the Rogue vi keys (hjklyubn).
    Shift-direction 	This moves straight until something interesting is
    or	/ direction	found (like a monster).
	Ctrl-G		Interlevel travel (to arbitrary dungeon levels or
			waypoints). Remembers old destinations if interrupted.
	Ctrl-O		Auto-explore.
	Ctrl-W		Det waypoint (check the option show_waypoints).

Resting and Searching:
 	s, Del		Rests and searches (these are the same) for one turn,
			this is also done with '.' or Numpad-5.
	5 or		Long resting/searching (until both health and magic 
     Shift-Numpad 5	points are full or something is found or 100 turns are 
			over).

Dungeon interaction:
	o		Open door.
	c		Close door.
     Ctrl-direction	Tries untrapping a known trap on the specified square,
     or * direction	else opens door if there is one,
			else attacks without move (even if no monster is seen).
	<		Use staircase to go higher. 
	>		Use staircase to go deeper, or enters shop/branch.  
	;		Examine occupied tile, also causes auto-pickup.
	x		Examine surroundings mode (see below for its commands).
	X		Examine level map (see below for level map commands).                  
	O		Show dungeon overview (branches, shops, and labyrinths).

Character information:
'display' below means usage of the message area,
'show' means usage of the whole screen.
	@		Display character status.
	[		Display worn armour.
	"		Display worn jewellery.
	C		Display experience info.
	^		Show religion screen.
	A		Show abilities/mutations.
	\		Show item knowledge.
	m		Show skill screen.
	i		Show inventory list.
	%		Show resistances.

Item interaction (inventory):
	v		View item description.
	{		Inscribe item (check the autoinscribe option).
	t		Throw/shoot an item.
	f		Fire first available missile.
	q		Quaff a potion.       
	e		Eat food (tries floor first, invorenty next).
	z		Zap a wand.
	r		Read a scroll or book.
	M		Memorise a spell from a book.
	w		Wield an item ( - for none).       
	'		Wield item a, or switch to b.
	E		Evoke power of wielded item.
	W		Wear armour.
	T		Take off armour.
	P		Put on jewellery.
	R		Remove jewellery.

Item interaction (floor):
	d		Drop an item.
	d#		Drop exact number of items.
	g or , 		Pick up items; press twice for pick up menu.
			You can use a prefix to pick up smaller quantities.
	D		Dissect a corpse. 

Other game-playing commands:
	a		Use special ability.
	p		Pray.
	Z		Cast a spell.
	!		Shout or command allies.

Non-game playing commands:
	V		Display version information.
	Ctrl-P		Show previous messages.
	Ctrl-R		Redraw screen.
	Ctrl-C		Clear main and level maps.
	#		Dump character to file (name.txt).
	:		Add note to dump file (see option take_notes).
	`		Add macro.
	~		Save macros.
	=		Reassign inventory/spell letters. 

In-game toggles:
	Ctrl-A		Toggle autopickup.
	Ctrl-V		Toggle auto-prayer.
	Ctrl-T		Toggle spell fizzle check.

Stashes:
	Ctrl-S		Mark stash (only sensible with stash_tracking=explicit, 
                        else this is automatically tracked).
	Ctrl-E		Erase stash (ignores the square from stash tracking).
	Ctrl-F		Find (this searches in stashes and shops, you can use
			regular expressions and also terms like 'long blades' 
			or 'artifacts').

Level map ('X')
---------------
The level map (brought up by 'X' in the main screen) uses the whole screen to
show the dungeon.
	Esc, Space	Leave level map.
        -		Scroll level map up
        +		Scroll level map down
	Direction	Moves cursor.
  Shift-Direction 	Moves cursor in bigger steps (check the option 
			level_map_cursor_step).
	.		Travels to cursor (also Enter and , and ;)   
			(if the cursor is on the character, moves cursor to last 
			travel destination instead).
	<		Cycle through up stairs.
	>		Cycle through down stairs.
	^		Cycle through traps.
	Tab		Cycle through shops and portals.
	I		Cycle through stashes (if the  option stash_tracking is 
			set to all, this cycles through all items and piles).
	Ctrl-C		Clear level and main maps (from temporarily seen
			monsters, clouds etc.).

Waypoints can be set on the level map. You can travel to waypoints using 
Ctrl-G. Check the option show_waypoints. The commands are
	Ctrl-W		Set waypoint.
	W		Cycle through waypoints.

Travel exclusions mark certain spots of the map as no-go areas for autotravel
and explore (the radius is set by the option travel_exclude_radius2).
	Ctrl-X		Set travel exclusion.
	Cltr-E		Erase all travel exclusions at once.
	X		Cycle through travel exclusions.


Examining surroundings ('x')
----------------------------
When roaming the dungeon, the surroundings mode is activated by 'x'. It lets you
have a look at items or monsters in line of sight. You may also examine stashed 
items outside current view using the options target_oos=true (if using this, 
check target_los_first).
	x, Esc, Space	Return to playing mode.
	' or *		Cycle objects forward.
	; or /		Cycle objects backward.
	+ or =		Cycle monsters forward.
	-		Cycle monsters backward.
	direction	Move cursor.
	. or Enter	Travel to cursor.
	?		Describe monster under cursor (also shows weapons, 
			wounding and enchantments).
	>		Cycle downstairs.
	<		Cycle upstairs.
	Tab		Cycle shops and portals.

Targeting
---------
Targeting mode is similar to examining surroundings. It is activated whenever
you fire projectiles, zap a wand or cast spells which uses targets. 
	x, Esc, Space	Stop targeting.
	direction	Shoot straight in this direction.
	+ or =		Cycle monsters forward (see option target_wrap).
	-		Cycle monsters backward.
	. or Enter	Fire (check option confirm_self_target).
	p or t		Fire at previous target (if still in sight).
	>		Fire, but stops at target.
	Ctrl-F		Toggle target modes (between enemies, all, friends; see
			also option target_zero_exp).
	*		Manually targeting: the direction keys will now move 
			the cursor, the keys '+' and '-' work as above, and '.'
			and Enter fire.

Shortcuts in lists (like multidrop):
------------------------------------
When dropping (with the drop_mode=multi option), the drop menu accepts several
shortcuts.
	(		Selects all missiles.
	)		Selects all hand weapons.
	[		Selects all armour.
	?		Selects all scrolls.
	%		Selects all food.
	&		Selects all carrion.
	+		Selects all books.
	/		Selects all wands.
	\		Selects all staves.
	!		Selects all potions.
	"		Selects all jewellery.
	}		Selects all miscellaneous items.
	,		Global select (subject to the drop_filter option).
	-		Global deselect (subject to the drop_filter option).
	*		Invert selection.
